README.md, before:

# ⚡ Electricity Billing System – Java GUI & JDBC Project

### 🏛 Academic Project | Java Swing | JDBC | DAO | Multithreading | Servlets

---

## 📌 Project Overview
The **Electricity Billing System** is a Java GUI-based desktop and web-enabled application designed to automate electricity billing processes. It allows secure customer record management, bill generation, usage tracking, and printable reports. The system integrates strong **Object-Oriented Programming**, **Database Connectivity**, **Collections**, **Multithreading**, and **Servlet-based processing**, ensuring performance, accuracy, and user-friendly experience.

---
## 🚨 Important Clarification for Evaluators

This project is a **Servlet-based web application** built using **Java Servlets, JSP, JDBC, and MVC architecture**.  
A **Java Swing GUI** is additionally provided as an alternative interface, but the **primary architecture is servlet-based**.
---

## 🏆 Marks Rubric Mapping Summary

### **Java GUI-Based Projects **
| Component | Implementation Evidence | 
|-----------|---------------------------|
| **OOP Implementation** (Polymorphism, Inheritance, Interfaces, Exception Handling) | Inheritance (Person → Customer / Employee), Polymorphic billing in Residential & Commercial, Billable interface, Custom exceptions | 
| **Collections & Generics** | ArrayList, HashMap<>, Generic filters & retrieval | 
| **Multithreading & Synchronization** | Concurrent bill generation & PDF export with synchronized update | 
| **Database Operation Classes** | DAO Layer – CustomerDAO, BillDAO | 
| **Database Connectivity (JDBC)** | PreparedStatements, ResultSet, Transactions | 
| **CRUD implementation using JDBC** | Add / Update / Delete customer, bill history storage | 



---

### **Servlet & Code Quality **
| Component | Implementation Evidence | 
|-----------|--------------------------|
| **Servlet Implementation** | LoginServlet, CustomerServlet, BillingServlet with GET/POST handling, session management, error handling | 
| **Code Quality & Execution** | MVC + DAO architecture, PreparedStatements (SQL injection prevention), input validation, error pages, clean formatting | 
| **Innovation / Extra Effort** | Dual interface (Swing GUI + Web), embedded Tomcat server, modern CSS styling, comprehensive error handling | 



---

## 🚀 Key Features
- Add / Update / Delete / Search customer records
- Generate electricity bills based on units consumed
- View past billing and usage history
- Export printable PDF bill receipt
- Multi-user authentication (Admin / Staff)
- Error & exception handling for invalid inputs
- Thread-safe bill calculations and background processing
- Java Swing-based GUI with validation

---

## 🧠 Technical Highlights

### 🔹 **Object-Oriented Programming**
- **Inheritance** → `Person` (superclass), `Customer`, `Employee`
- **Polymorphism** → Bill calculation overridden in `ResidentialCustomer`, `CommercialCustomer`
- **Interfaces** → `Billable` interface defining billing operations
- **Custom Exceptions** → `InvalidMeterReadingException`

### 🔹 **Collections & Generics**
```java
ArrayList<Customer> customers;
HashMap<String, Bill> billHistory;
```
---
### 🔹 JDBC + Database Layer (DAO)

- CustomerDAO, BillDAO

- Prepared Statements & Transactions

- Rollback on failure

- Prevents SQL Injection
---
### 💻 GUI Implementation

- Java Swing user interface

- Form validation & interactive controls

- Dynamic calculation interface

- Printable preview window
---
### 📁 Project Folder Structure
```
ElectricityBillingSystem/
│── src/
│   ├── model/
│   ├── dao/
│   ├── servlet/# Web Controllers (HttpServlet)
│   ├── gui/# Swing Desktop Interface (Optional)
│   └── util/
│── lib/
│── database.sql
│── README.md
```
---
### 🧪 Requirements

- **Java JDK 8+** (Java 8 or higher)
- **MySQL Server** (5.7+ or 8.0+)
- **Maven** (for building and dependency management)
- **IDE** (optional): NetBeans / Eclipse / IntelliJ IDEA
- **Apache Tomcat** (optional, for servlet modules only)

---

## 🚀 Quick Start Guide

### Step 1: Prerequisites Setup

1. **Install Java JDK 8+**
   ```bash
   java -version  # Verify installation
   ```

2. **Install MySQL**
   - Download and install MySQL from https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/
   - Start MySQL service
   - Note your MySQL root password

3. **Install Maven** (if not already installed)
   ```bash
   mvn -version  # Verify installation
   ```
   - Download from: https://maven.apache.org/download.cgi

### Step 2: Database Setup

1. **Create the database:**
   ```bash
   mysql -u root -p < setup_database.sql
   ```
   
   Or manually:
   ```sql
   mysql -u root -p
   source setup_database.sql;
   ```

2. **Verify database creation:**
   ```sql
   SHOW DATABASES;
   USE Bill_system;
   SHOW TABLES;
   ```

### Step 3: Configure Database Connection

1. **Edit `src/db.properties`** with your MySQL credentials:
   ```properties
   db.url=jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/Bill_system
   db.username=root
   db.password=your_mysql_password
   ```

   If you leave `db.password` empty, the system will try common default passwords.

### Step 4: Run the Application

#### Option A: Using Maven (Recommended)

**Linux/Mac:**
```bash
./run.sh
```

**Windows:**
```cmd
run.bat
```

**Or manually:**
```bash
mvn clean compile
mvn exec:java
```

#### Option B: Using IDE

1. Import project into your IDE (IntelliJ IDEA / Eclipse / NetBeans)
2. Let Maven download dependencies automatically
3. Run `electricity.billing.system.Splash` as the main class

#### Option C: Manual Compilation (Without Maven)

1. Download MySQL Connector J: https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/connector/j/
2. Compile:
   ```bash
   javac -cp "rs2xml.jar:mysql-connector-j-8.x.x.jar" -d out src/electricity/billing/system/*.java
   ```
3. Run:
   ```bash
   java -cp "out:rs2xml.jar:mysql-connector-j-8.x.x.jar" electricity.billing.system.Splash
   ```

### Step 5: Login Credentials

**Admin Login:**
- Username: `admin`
- Password: `admin123`
- Type: Admin

**Customer Login (Demo):**
- Username: `demo`
- Password: `demo123`
- Type: Customer

---

## 📝 Troubleshooting

### Database Connection Issues

1. **Check MySQL is running:**
   ```bash
   # Linux/Mac
   sudo systemctl status mysql
   # or
   mysqladmin -u root -p status
   
   # Windows
   # Check Services panel for MySQL service
   ```

2. **Verify database exists:**
   ```sql
   SHOW DATABASES LIKE 'Bill_system';
   ```

3. **Check credentials in `src/db.properties`**

4. **Test connection manually:**
   ```bash
   mysql -u root -p -h localhost Bill_system
   ```

### Build Issues

1. **Maven not found:**
   - Install Maven and add to PATH
   - Or use IDE with built-in Maven support

2. **Dependencies not downloading:**
   - Check internet connection
   - Verify Maven settings.xml (if using proxy)

3. **rs2xml.jar not found:**
   - Ensure `rs2xml.jar` is in project root directory

### Runtime Issues

1. **ClassNotFoundException:**
   - Ensure all dependencies are in classpath
   - Use Maven to handle dependencies automatically

2. **GUI not displaying:**
   - Check Java version (JDK 8+ required)
   - Verify icon resources are in `src/icon/` directory

---

###  ▶ Alternative: Run via IDE

- Import project into IDE (IntelliJ IDEA / Eclipse / NetBeans)
- Let Maven download dependencies automatically
- Configure database in `src/db.properties`
- Run `electricity.billing.system.Splash` as main class
- Login as Admin / Customer and generate bills

###  ▶ Web Module (Optional)

- Deploy servlet module to Tomcat for web-based access
- Configure `WEB-INF/web.xml` for servlet mappings
---
###  🌱 Future Enhancements

- UPI / Online Payment Gateway Integration

- Machine-Learning consumption prediction

- Mobile App connectivity

- Advanced BI dashboards
---
### 🏁 Final Notes

- This project fulfills all evaluation requirements for billing system, showcasing strong programming, database integration, GUI design, innovation, and maintainable code structure. Ideal for academic demonstration and production scalability.

Commit message:

Add architecture overview to README
Added architecture overview section explaining the MVC structure and components used in the project.

README.md, after:

# ⚡ Electricity Billing System – Java GUI & JDBC Project

### 🏛 Academic Project | Java Swing | JDBC | DAO | Multithreading | Servlets

---

## 📌 Project Overview
The **Electricity Billing System** is a Java GUI-based desktop and web-enabled application designed to automate electricity billing processes. It allows secure customer record management, bill generation, usage tracking, and printable reports. The system integrates strong **Object-Oriented Programming**, **Database Connectivity**, **Collections**, **Multithreading**, and **Servlet-based processing**, ensuring performance, accuracy, and user-friendly experience.
---
## Architecture Overview

This project follows MVC architecture:
- Model → DAO + JDBC
- View → JSP + Swing
- Controller → Java Servlets

The Swing GUI is optional and does not replace the web servlet flow.

---
## 🚨 Important Clarification for Evaluators

This project is a **Servlet-based web application** built using **Java Servlets, JSP, JDBC, and MVC architecture**.  
A **Java Swing GUI** is additionally provided as an alternative interface, but the **primary architecture is servlet-based**.
---

## 🏆 Marks Rubric Mapping Summary

### **Java GUI-Based Projects **
| Component | Implementation Evidence | 
|-----------|---------------------------|
| **OOP Implementation** (Polymorphism, Inheritance, Interfaces, Exception Handling) | Inheritance (Person → Customer / Employee), Polymorphic billing in Residential & Commercial, Billable interface, Custom exceptions | 
| **Collections & Generics** | ArrayList, HashMap<>, Generic filters & retrieval | 
| **Multithreading & Synchronization** | Concurrent bill generation & PDF export with synchronized update | 
| **Database Operation Classes** | DAO Layer – CustomerDAO, BillDAO | 
| **Database Connectivity (JDBC)** | PreparedStatements, ResultSet, Transactions | 
| **CRUD implementation using JDBC** | Add / Update / Delete customer, bill history storage | 



---

### **Servlet & Code Quality **
| Component | Implementation Evidence | 
|-----------|--------------------------|
| **Servlet Implementation** | LoginServlet, CustomerServlet, BillingServlet with GET/POST handling, session management, error handling | 
| **Code Quality & Execution** | MVC + DAO architecture, PreparedStatements (SQL injection prevention), input validation, error pages, clean formatting | 
| **Innovation / Extra Effort** | Dual interface (Swing GUI + Web), embedded Tomcat server, modern CSS styling, comprehensive error handling | 



---

## 🚀 Key Features
- Add / Update / Delete / Search customer records
- Generate electricity bills based on units consumed
- View past billing and usage history
- Export printable PDF bill receipt
- Multi-user authentication (Admin / Staff)
- Error & exception handling for invalid inputs
- Thread-safe bill calculations and background processing
- Java Swing-based GUI with validation

---

## 🧠 Technical Highlights

### 🔹 **Object-Oriented Programming**
- **Inheritance** → `Person` (superclass), `Customer`, `Employee`
- **Polymorphism** → Bill calculation overridden in `ResidentialCustomer`, `CommercialCustomer`
- **Interfaces** → `Billable` interface defining billing operations
- **Custom Exceptions** → `InvalidMeterReadingException`

### 🔹 **Collections & Generics**
```java
ArrayList<Customer> customers;
HashMap<String, Bill> billHistory;
```
---
### 🔹 JDBC + Database Layer (DAO)

- CustomerDAO, BillDAO

- Prepared Statements & Transactions

- Rollback on failure

- Prevents SQL Injection
---
### 💻 GUI Implementation

- Java Swing user interface

- Form validation & interactive controls

- Dynamic calculation interface

- Printable preview window
---
### 📁 Project Folder Structure
```
ElectricityBillingSystem/
│── src/
│   ├── model/
│   ├── dao/
│   ├── servlet/# Web Controllers (HttpServlet)
│   ├── gui/# Swing Desktop Interface (Optional)
│   └── util/
│── lib/
│── database.sql
│── README.md
```
---
### 🧪 Requirements

- **Java JDK 8+** (Java 8 or higher)
- **MySQL Server** (5.7+ or 8.0+)
- **Maven** (for building and dependency management)
- **IDE** (optional): NetBeans / Eclipse / IntelliJ IDEA
- **Apache Tomcat** (optional, for servlet modules only)

---

## 🚀 Quick Start Guide

### Step 1: Prerequisites Setup

1. **Install Java JDK 8+**
   ```bash
   java -version  # Verify installation
   ```

2. **Install MySQL**
   - Download and install MySQL from https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/
   - Start MySQL service
   - Note your MySQL root password

3. **Install Maven** (if not already installed)
   ```bash
   mvn -version  # Verify installation
   ```
   - Download from: https://maven.apache.org/download.cgi

### Step 2: Database Setup

1. **Create the database:**
   ```bash
   mysql -u root -p < setup_database.sql
   ```
   
   Or manually:
   ```sql
   mysql -u root -p
   source setup_database.sql;
   ```

2. **Verify database creation:**
   ```sql
   SHOW DATABASES;
   USE Bill_system;
   SHOW TABLES;
   ```

### Step 3: Configure Database Connection

1. **Edit `src/db.properties`** with your MySQL credentials:
   ```properties
   db.url=jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/Bill_system
   db.username=root
   db.password=your_mysql_password
   ```

   If you leave `db.password` empty, the system will try common default passwords.

### Step 4: Run the Application

#### Option A: Using Maven (Recommended)

**Linux/Mac:**
```bash
./run.sh
```

**Windows:**
```cmd
run.bat
```

**Or manually:**
```bash
mvn clean compile
mvn exec:java
```

#### Option B: Using IDE

1. Import project into your IDE (IntelliJ IDEA / Eclipse / NetBeans)
2. Let Maven download dependencies automatically
3. Run `electricity.billing.system.Splash` as the main class

#### Option C: Manual Compilation (Without Maven)

1. Download MySQL Connector J: https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/connector/j/
2. Compile:
   ```bash
   javac -cp "rs2xml.jar:mysql-connector-j-8.x.x.jar" -d out src/electricity/billing/system/*.java
   ```
3. Run:
   ```bash
   java -cp "out:rs2xml.jar:mysql-connector-j-8.x.x.jar" electricity.billing.system.Splash
   ```

### Step 5: Login Credentials

**Admin Login:**
- Username: `admin`
- Password: `admin123`
- Type: Admin

**Customer Login (Demo):**
- Username: `demo`
- Password: `demo123`
- Type: Customer

---

## 📝 Troubleshooting

### Database Connection Issues

1. **Check MySQL is running:**
   ```bash
   # Linux/Mac
   sudo systemctl status mysql
   # or
   mysqladmin -u root -p status
   
   # Windows
   # Check Services panel for MySQL service
   ```

2. **Verify database exists:**
   ```sql
   SHOW DATABASES LIKE 'Bill_system';
   ```

3. **Check credentials in `src/db.properties`**

4. **Test connection manually:**
   ```bash
   mysql -u root -p -h localhost Bill_system
   ```

### Build Issues

1. **Maven not found:**
   - Install Maven and add to PATH
   - Or use IDE with built-in Maven support

2. **Dependencies not downloading:**
   - Check internet connection
   - Verify Maven settings.xml (if using proxy)

3. **rs2xml.jar not found:**
   - Ensure `rs2xml.jar` is in project root directory

### Runtime Issues

1. **ClassNotFoundException:**
   - Ensure all dependencies are in classpath
   - Use Maven to handle dependencies automatically

2. **GUI not displaying:**
   - Check Java version (JDK 8+ required)
   - Verify icon resources are in `src/icon/` directory

---

###  ▶ Alternative: Run via IDE

- Import project into IDE (IntelliJ IDEA / Eclipse / NetBeans)
- Let Maven download dependencies automatically
- Configure database in `src/db.properties`
- Run `electricity.billing.system.Splash` as main class
- Login as Admin / Customer and generate bills

###  ▶ Web Module (Optional)

- Deploy servlet module to Tomcat for web-based access
- Configure `WEB-INF/web.xml` for servlet mappings
---
###  🌱 Future Enhancements

- UPI / Online Payment Gateway Integration

- Machine-Learning consumption prediction

- Mobile App connectivity

- Advanced BI dashboards
---
### 🏁 Final Notes

- This project fulfills all evaluation requirements for billing system, showcasing strong programming, database integration, GUI design, innovation, and maintainable code structure. Ideal for academic demonstration and production scalability.
